in the last several lectures we talked
about different ways to sort data now in
this lecture actually going to take a
step back and stop talking about
specific sort and start talking about
the fundamental nature of sorting itself
so first I'll just mention that sorting
is of course a very useful task we like
to put things in order right so for
example you have open a sly a Google
sheet spreadsheet or an Excel
spreadsheet or whatever and you want to
sort your rose by I don't know the name
of the students in the table that's sort
of but we can also use sorting for a
bunch of not so obvious tasks for
example finding duplicates in an array
so the Viet Minh array anyone know are
there any duplicates you can of course
look at every pair and say okay well
this pair finally I found one where
there's a duplicates but an even better
with bit better way would be a stick
your a sort it using say merge sort and
then just look at each item just the
ones next to it and that will take less
time overall that's something you can
think about later if you'd like also in
the study guide another example is the
3-sum problem mentioned in a much
earlier lecture so that's this right
here so in the 3-sum problem you have to
find three it gives your given an array
in no particular order you want to find
do there exists a triplet of items that
if you sum them you get zero and it
turns out that naive approach is just to
consider all triplets which is n cubed
and a better approach involves sorting
first and it'll take n squared and again
study guide will give you some tips or
give you scaffolding for thinking about
these two problems so there's many ways
of course to sort an array whether it's
for the basic task of just getting
things in order or if you want to use it
as a stepping stone to solving some
bigger other problems now each of this
works we talked about they all have
their own different trade-offs and
features I'll briefly talk about those
in the next slide of what this lecture
is mostly going to be about is how hard
is it to sort period okay now before we
get to that question two things first
this table so in the table I have my
four main flavors of sorting we've
talked about this is not an exhaustive
list there are many other ways to sort
but these are the most popular and
famous ones we have a selection based
sort in our case using a heap to make it
faster we have insertion based sort we
have merging base towards and we have
partitioning based sort each of them has
a fundamental idea and they all have a
bunch of different
memory usage time usage and some extra
little details that are interesting as
well as whether or not the sort is
stable okay now not to review this table
here census in the previous lecture but
i do want to focus on one little thing
here which is the runtimes so heap sort
merge sort and quicksort are all
basically n log n sorts there's a little
bit of a caveat with quicksort plus it's
basically an in log n soort as long as
you do things right inside an insertion
sort is N squared for the most part so
now the question is could we do better
is there some other sort not in this
list that's like in log log n on any
input or maybe just in is that possible
and so what this lecture is going to be
about is addressing that question but
the second thing I want to talk about
before we get there is some math
problems out of nowhere just to get us
primed and ready so my first question
for you Matt from out of nowhere I would
like you to consider the functions in
factorial and in over 2 to the N over 2
and your job is to figure out is it true
that in fact oriole grows at least as
quickly as n over 2 to the N over 2 and
you should prove your answer and by
proof I mean just convince yourself this
doesn't have to be a formal proof or
anything but give it a shot use however
much time feels right can i'll spoil it
and i guess i should bring this up to
say if you aren't quite sure if you
don't over exactly what that means you
can informally think of it as greater
than or equal to more formally it just
says that for sufficiently large in this
function is bigger than this function
ok so my spoiler I'm going to write out
n factorial and I'm also going to write
out n over 2 to the N over 2 for some
particular n that's going to be my
approach and i'm going to pick n so just
to show you an example for 10 10
factorial of 10 x 9 x 8 times 7 times 6
times x 1 whereas in over 2 to the N
over 2 is 5 times 5 times 5 times 5
times 5 now we just compare these two
values element by element or product by
product we see that not product what do
you call them multiple kend actually I'm
going to remember anyway it's not
important so we compared 10 to 59 58 57
56 25 and we get that this 10 factorial
is obviously bigger than 5 to the five
on and so indeed for large n we know
that n factorial is greater than in over
to the N over 2 that is just look at any
other number 105 thousand a million
basically the same pattern holds true
and therefore we can say that n
factorial is at least as large as in
over 2 to the N over 2 that's math
problem out of nowhere number one but I
have another for you so now I'd like you
to say given that fact we just showed
that in a n factorial is greater than n
over 2 to the N over 2 for large ends I
want you to show that log n factorial is
greater than or equal to n log in and
formally and then as a reminder log is
we don't really care what base you just
show it for any base if you want to
specific one but it's just not really
part of the thing because given any base
we can just do a change of base and that
would be a leading constant and won't
affect our asymptotic notation so give
this a shot again pause the video think
about it and then I'll spoil it with my
approach ok I hope it's no surprise i
might be taking the laws of both sides
hint ok so here's my spoiler so since i
know that n factorial is greater than n
over 2 to the n over 2 for large n then
if i take the log of both sides we have
that login factorial it's greater than
login of sight log of n over 2 to the n
over 2 no big surprises here i can bring
down this exponent just using our usual
logarithm rules at this point i can drop
this tube and i'll say that if we drop
this too we're discarding the
unnecessary constant and we could say
that for very large and of course login
factorial gross at least as quickly as n
log n over 2 now this in over to it
turns out if you think about it login /
2 is just login minus log 2 so this too
is not very important so we can just
drop that and we end up saying that
login factorial grows at least as
quickly as n log in so that's makes what
I just said and this is just a note here
repeating what I said out loud that
login / 2 is the same thing
asymptotically as long again that is
their big theta each other if you like
so this right here we have now shown
this seemingly random fact now why do we
keep working with that factorial haven't
gotten there yet math problem out of
nowhere but hopefully your conventio
that log n factorial is greater than
Omega R so I today's goes at least this
back fast as and logon okay so to last
math problems this well this doesn't say
this is the last math problem than I
have like a trivia question next so we
have n log in and I want you to show me
that this or yourself that it's big
Omega log n factorial there seems to be
an extra parentheses but we'll live with
that and you know that's fine imagine
it's not there I'll cover it well i
can't i'm in the corner over here anyway
so try and figure that out and then i
will spoil it for you momentarily okay
so in this case my proof is as follows
login factorial this is very similar to
the first one we did but now we're going
to expand out of some the login
factorial is login plus log n minus 1
plus log n minus 2 plus plus log 1 this
is just again our usual rules for
expanding out logarithms right this is a
product we can turn that to a proc the
log of a product of things which we can
turn into a sum of logarithms in log in
by contrast it login plus log n plus log
n plus plus log in other words we have
the same number of logs but in this case
they're all login in this case they get
smaller and so in this case we could see
that in login will grow at least as fast
as log n factorial right this thing
right here is bigger than this right
here so we've shown a couple of things
right so we've shown the n log n is big
Omega log n factorial we
login factorial is big Omega and login
and so my question for you is which of
the following things can we say can we
say the N log in at theta log n
factorial can we see the login factorial
of theta n log in both of those things
or neither so think about that and I'll
spoil it on the next slide all right so
going through this the question is what
do we have this is basically a
definition test and kind of a reminder
here so it turns out oops all right so
it turns out we can say it's both a and
B and the basic reasoning is just the
way I think about is informally you can
imagine this means n log n is greater
than or equal to log in factorial right
that's just roughly speaking what this
means how you can read it off in your
brain you are not trained you haven't
been since birth thinking about big
omegas so it could be a little hard to
read but you can translate it it's a
little messy you could translate it to
me an N log n is greater than or equal
to log n factorial and over here we
could say log n factorial is greater
than in log in these two statements both
based basically both say in log in and
equal to log n factorial and this one's
log in fact or equals n log N and so the
only way you can reconcile these two
facts that this function is greater than
equal to this this is greater than equal
this is to say that they're equal that's
the rough way I think about it whenever
I'm trying to translate the symbols
especially working with someone who
doesn't know they symbols well and so
ultimately what we've just shown all
that work we've just done this math
problem Adam nowhere has been to show
that n log in and log n factorial are
basically the same function
asymptotically that is they'll be a
little different in terms of their exact
value but asymptotically they converge
to the same thing so they track each
other beautifully as we move to large
end ok now why do we do this again I
mean I haven't said but if I was
important for us to prime it to make
sure we really understand the nature of
big Omega and theta because it'll be
really important moving forward with the
rest of this lecture